Objects Used to Prop Open a Window
Michelle Menting

Dog bone, stapler,
cribbage board, garlic press
     because this window is loose—lacks
suction, lacks grip.
Bungee cord, bootstrap,
dog leash, leather belt
     because this window had sash cords.
They frayed. They broke.
Feather duster, thatch of straw, empty
bottle of Elmer's glue
     because this window is loud—its hinges clack
open, clack shut.
Stuffed bear, baby blanket,
single crib newel
     because this window is split. It's dividing
in two.
Velvet moss, sagebrush,
willow branch, robin's wing
     because this window, it's pane-less. It's only
a frame of air.
******
The New Church
Lucia Cherciu

The old cupola glinted above the clouds, shone
among fir trees, but it took him an hour
for the half mile all the way up the hill. As he trailed,
the village passed him by, greeted him,
asked about his health, but everybody hurried
to catch the mass, left him leaning against fences,
measuring the road with the walking stick he sculpted.
He yearned for the day when the new church
would be built—right across the road. Now
it rises above the moon: saints in frescoes
meet the eye, and only the rain has started to cut
through the shingles on the roof of his empty
house. The apple trees have taken over the sky,
sequestered the gate, sidled over the porch.
******
Look for Me
Ted Kooser

Look for me under the hood
of that old Chevrolet settled in weeds
at the end of the pasture.
I'm the radiator that spent its years
bolted in front of an engine
shoving me forward into the wind.
Whatever was in me in those days
has mostly leaked away,
but my cap's still screwed on tight
and I know the names of all these
tattered moths and broken grasshoppers
the rest of you've forgotten.
******
Wild Life
Grace Cavalieri

Behind the silo, the Mother Rabbit
hunches like a giant spider with strange calm:
six tiny babies beneath, each
clamoring for a sweet syringe of milk.
This may sound cute to you, reading
from your pulpit of plenty,
but one small one was left out of reach,
a knife of fur
barging between the others.
I watched behind a turret of sand. If
I could have cautioned the mother rabbit
I would. If I could summon the
Bunnies to fit him in beneath
the belly's swell
I would. But instead, I stood frozen, wishing
for some equity. This must be
why it's called Wild Life because of all the
crazed emotions tangled up in
the underbrush within us.
Did I tell you how
the smallest one, black and trembling,
hopped behind the kudzu
still filigreed with wanting?
Should we talk now of animal heritage, their species,
creature development? And what do we say
about form and focus—
writing this when a stray goes hungry, and away.
******
Umbrella
Connie Wanek

When I push your button
you fly off the handle,
old skin and bones,
black bat wing.
We're alike, you and I.
Both of us
resemble my mother,
so fierce in her advocacy
on behalf of
the most vulnerable child
who'll catch his death
in this tempest.
Such a headwind!
Sometimes it requires
all my strength
just to end a line.
But when the wind is at
my back, we're likely
to get carried away, and say
something we can never retract,
something saturated from the ribs
down, an old stony
word like ruin. You're what roof
I have, frail thing,
you're my argument
against the whole sky.
You're the fundamental difference
between wet and dry.
******
Sunday
January Gill O'Neil

You are the start of the week
or the end of it, and according
to The Beatles you creep in
like a nun. You're the second
full day the kids have been
away with their father, the second
full day of an empty house.
Sunday, I've missed you. I've been
sitting in the backyard with a glass
of Pinot waiting for your arrival.
Did you know the first Sweet 100s
are turning red in the garden,
but the lettuce has grown
too bitter to eat. I am looking
up at the bluest sky I have ever seen,
cerulean blue, a heaven sky
no one would believe I was under.
You are my witness. No day
is promised. You are absolution.
You are my unwritten to-do list,
my dishes in the sink, my brownie
breakfast, my braless day.
******
Invisible Fish
Joy Harjo

Invisible fish swim this ghost ocean now described by waves of sand, by water-worn rock. Soon the fish will learn to walk. Then humans will come ashore and paint dreams on the dying stone. Then later, much later, the ocean floor will be punctuated by Chevy trucks, carrying the dreamers’ decendants, who are going to the store.
******
Don’t Bother the Earth Spirit
Joy Harjo

Don’t bother the earth spirit who lives here. She is working on a story. It is the oldest story in the world and it is delicate, changing. If she sees you watching she will invite you in for coffee, give you warm bread, and you will be obligated to stay and listen. But this is no ordinary story. You will have to endure earthquakes, lightning, the deaths of all those you love, the most blinding beauty. It’s a story so compelling you may never want to leave; this is how she traps you. See that stone finger over there? That is the only one who ever escaped.
******
The One Thing That Can Save America
John Ashbery

Is anything central?
Orchards flung out on the land,
Urban forests, rustic plantations, knee-high hills?
Are place names central?
Elm Grove, Adcock Corner, Story Book Farm?
As they concur with a rush at eye level
Beating themselves into eyes which have had enough
Thank you, no more thank you.
And they come on like scenery mingled with darkness
The damp plains, overgrown suburbs,
Places of known civic pride, of civil obscurity.
 
These are connected to my version of America
But the juice is elsewhere.
This morning as I walked out of your room
After breakfast crosshatched with
Backward and forward glances, backward into light,
Forward into unfamiliar light,
Was it our doing, and was it
The material, the lumber of life, or of lives
We were measuring, counting?
A mood soon to be forgotten
In crossed girders of light, cool downtown shadow
In this morning that has seized us again?
 
I know that I braid too much on my own
Snapped-off perceptions of things as they come to me.
They are private and always will be.
Where then are the private turns of event
Destined to bloom later like golden chimes
Released over a city from a highest tower?
The quirky things that happen to me, and I tell you,
And you know instantly what I mean?
What remote orchard reached by winding roads
Hides them? Where are these roots?
 
It is the lumps and trials
That tell us whether we shall be known
And whether our fate can be exemplary, like a star.
All the rest is waiting
For a letter that never arrives,
Day after day, the exasperation
Until finally you have ripped it open not knowing what it is,
The two envelope halves lying on a plate.
The message was wise, and seemingly
Dictated a long time ago, but its time has still
Not arrived, telling of danger, and the mostly limited
Steps that can be taken against danger
Now and in the future, in cool yards,
In quiet small houses in the country,
Our country, in fenced areas, in cool shady streets.
******
["Hour in which I consider hydrangea"]
Simone White

Hour in which I consider hydrangea, a salt or sand plant, varietal, the question of varietals, the diet of every mother I know, 5 pounds feels like 20, I have lost … I have lost, yes, a sense of my own possible beauty, grown external, I externalize beauty. Beauty occurs on the surface of plants; the sun darkens the skin of my child, he is so small, he is beautiful (I can see; it is obvious) and everything about him is beautiful. His hand swells from the bite [spread?] of some insect[’s] venom because he is small. He appears to feel nothing. He smashes his skull against the floor. He screams. I hold him in my lap on the kitchen floor in front of an open freezer, pressing a pack of frozen clay against his forehead. He likes the cold. I see; it is so obvious. Hydrangea. When I move, when I walk pushing my child’s stroller (it is both walking and pushing or hauling, sometimes, also, lifting; it is having another body, an adjunct body composed of errand and weight and tenderness and no small amount of power), I imagine I can feel this small amount of weight, this 5 pounds like 20, interfering with the twitch of every muscle in my body. As an object, a mother is confusing, a middle-aged mother with little spare flesh, I feel every inch of major muscle pulling against gravity and against the weight of my child, now sleeping. This is the hour for thinking hydrangea. Let no man look at me. I stop to brush the drowsy child’s little eye. His face. He barely considers his mother. I am all around him. Why should he consider what is all around him? Perhaps what is missing is a subtle power of differentiation. I am in, therefore, a time of mass apprehensions.
******
Stung
Heid E. Erdrich

She couldn't help but sting my finger,
clinging a moment before I flung her
to the ground. Her gold is true, not the trick
evening light plays on my roses.
She curls into herself, stinger twitching,
gilt wings folded. Her whole life just a few weeks,
and my pain subsided in a moment.
In the cold, she hardly had her wits to buzz.
No warning from either of us:
she sleeping in the richness of those petals,
then the hand, my hand, cupping the bloom
in devastating force, crushing the petals for the scent.
And she mortally threatened, wholly unaware
that I do this daily, alone with the gold last light,
in what seems to me an act of love.
******
Nothing But Good...
Sarah White

I will not speak ill of Jack Flick.
I will rarely look
at the scar he made on my cheek
one summer at the lake.
I won't speak ill of Jack whose freckles
and gangly legs are gone.
So is the drained face I saw when he saw
what he'd done with a sharp rock
nonchalantly skipped.
I will speak well, for it was somewhat
sweet to lie on the dock while Jack
and his friends bent down
and wiped my face with a sandy towel.
I will speak well of them,
for most are gone
and the wound proved small.
I will speak well, for the rock
missed my eye. I can hardly find
the scar. Jack went into the air
corps, fought in one of the wars,
retired, and lived less than a year
before his tender heart gave out.
I will speak well of Jack.
******
How Quiet
Judith Harris

How quiet is the spruce,
the wind twills
through the uppermost tier
of splayed leaves.
Now the song of a bird
like the squeaky lock
over a canoe's oar,
followed by startling chirps,
the sky pushing its clouds
like sailboats,
and I think, what kind of God
keeps himself secret
so that to find him out
we have to seek, as children do
for something like the beetle
scuttling between grass,
hidden in plain sight.
******
Porcupine
Kelly Madigan

You think we are the pointed argument,
the man drunk at the party showing off
his gun collection, the bed of nettles.
 
What we really are is hidden from you:
girl weeping in the closet among her stepfather's boots;
tuft of rabbit fur caught in barbed wire; body of the baby
in the landfill; boy with the shy mouth playing his guitar
at the picnic table, out in the dirt yard.
 
We slide into this world benign and pliable,
quills pressed down smooth over back and tail.
Only one hour here stiffens the barbs into thousands
of quick retorts. Everything this well-guarded
remembers being soft once.
******
Summer Apples
Cathryn Essinger

I planted an apple tree in memory
of my mother, who is not gone,
 
but whose memory has become
so transparent that she remembers
 
slicing apples with her grandmother
(yellow apples; blue bowl) better than
 
the fruit that I hand her today. Still,
she polishes the surface with her thumb,
 
holds it to the light and says with no
hesitation, Oh, Yellow Transparent . . . 
 they're so fragile, you can almost seeto the core. She no longer remembers how
 
to roll the crust, sweeten the sauce, but
her desire is clear—it is pie that she wants.
 
And so, I slice as close as I dare to the core—
to that little cathedral to memory—where
 
the seeds remember everything they need
to know to become yellow and transparent.
 
 
******
Visiting the Neighborhood
P. Ivan Young

The entrance at the back of the complex
led onto a road, where an upended couch
tilted into a ditch and a washing machine
gleamed avocado beneath pine needles.
 
From the end, you turned left and left again,
then cut a trail to find the cul-de-sac
of bright brick houses. We'd walk as far
as we dared before a man pushing a mower
 
might stop to ask, "whadda you boys need?"
That was a question we could never answer.
I loved the name of the place, White Hall,
imagined that each interior was a stretch
 
of marble perfect wall adorned by smiling
photos of the family. Our own halls
were brailled with nail holes of former
tenants, the spackled rounds of fists.
 
But doesn't longing clarify the body?
The boys I left behind: Tommy, wearing
the World War II trenching tool;
Danny, whose father, so much older
 
than the other parents, died in his recliner
one sunny afternoon while watching baseball;
Duke, who stole his mother's car and crashed
into a wall. Boys who knew when you were posing,
 
waiting for someone to say, "smile." Boys
who, on those latch-key days, held themselves
in narrow passages when no one
was there to show them what to do. 
 
******
scars
Truong Tran

my father’s body is a map
a record of his journey
 
he carries a bullet
lodged in his left thigh
there is a hollow where it entered
a protruding bump where it sleeps
the doctors say it will never awaken
 
it is the one souvenir he insists on keeping
mother has her own opinionsbố cùa con điên—your father is crazy
 
as a child
i wanted a scar just like my father’s
bold and appalling     a mushroom explosion
that said i too was at war
instead i settled for a grain of rice
a scar so small look closely there
here between the eyes
a bit to the right
there on the bridge of my nose
 
father says i was too young to remember
it happened while i was sleeping
leaking roof the pounding rain
drop after drop after drop
 
******
what remains two
Truong Tran

it has long been forgotten this practice of the mother
weaning a child she crushes the seeds of a green
chili rubs it to her nipple what the child feels
she too will   share in this act   of love
my own mother says it was not meant
to be cruel when cruelty she tells me
is a child’s lips   torn from breast as proof
back home the women wear teeth marks
 
******
West of Myself
Debora Greger

Why are you still seventeen
and drifting like a dog after dark,
dragging a shadow you’ve found?
 
Put it back where it belongs,
and that bend of river, too. That’s not the road
you want, though you have it to yourself.
 
Gone are the cars that crawl to town
from the reactors, a parade of insects, metallic,
fuming along the one four-lane street.
 
The poplars of the shelterbelt lean away
from the bypass that never had much to pass by
but coyote and rabbitbrush.
 
Pinpricks stabbed in a map too dark to read—
I stared at stars light-years away.
Listen. That hissing? Just a sprinkler
 
damping down yesterday until it’s today.
The cottonwoods shiver, or I do,
every leaf rustling as if it’s the one
 
about to tear itself, not I.
Memory takes the graveyard shift.
 
******
Yes
Debora Greger




Yes, your childhood now a legend of fountains
                                                         —jorge gullén



Yes, your childhood, now a legend
gone to weeds, still remembers the gray road
that set out to cross the desert of the future.
 
And how, always just ahead,
gray water glittered, happy to be just a mirage.
Who steps off the gray bus at the depot?
 
Sidewalks shudder all the way home.
Blinds close their scratchy eyes.
Who settles in your old room?
 
Sniffy air sprawls as if it owns the place,
and now your teenage secrets have no one to tell.
For the spider laying claim to the corner,
 
there is a stickiness to spin, that the living may beg
to be wrapped in silk and devoured,
leaving not even the flinch from memory.
******
Bounden Duty
James Tate

               I got a call from the White House, from the
President himself, asking me if I’d do him a personal
favor. I like the President, so I said, “Sure, Mr.
President, anything you like.” He said, “Just act
like nothing’s going on. Act normal. That would
mean the world to me. Can you do that, Leon?” “Why,
sure, Mr. President, you’ve got it. Normal, that’s
how I’m going to act. I won’t let on, even if I’m
tortured,” I said, immediately regretting that “tortured”
bit. He thanked me several times and hung up. I was
dying to tell someone that the President himself called
me, but I knew I couldn’t. The sudden pressure to
act normal was killing me. And what was going on
anyway. I didn’t know anything was going on. I
saw the President on TV yesterday. He was shaking
hands with a farmer. What if it wasn’t really a
farmer? I needed to buy some milk, but suddenly
I was afraid to go out. I checked what I had on.
I looked “normal” to me, but maybe I looked more
like I was trying to be normal. That’s pretty
suspicious. I opened the door and looked around.
What was going on? There was a car parked in front
of my car that I had never seen before, a car that
was trying to look normal, but I wasn’t fooled.
If you need milk, you have to get milk, otherwise
people will think something’s going on. I got into
my car and sped down the road. I could feel those
little radar guns popping behind every tree and bush,
but, apparently, they were under orders not to stop
me. I ran into Kirsten in the store. “Hey, what’s
going on, Leon?” she said. She had a very nice smile.
I hated to lie to her. “Nothing’s going on. Just
getting milk for my cat,” I said. “I didn’t know
you had a cat,” she said. “I meant to say coffee.
You’re right, I don’t have a cat. Sometimes I
refer to my coffee as my cat. It’s just a private
joke. Sorry,” I said. “Are you all right?” she
asked. “Nothing’s going on, Kirsten. I promise
you. Everything is normal. The President shook
hands with a farmer, a real farmer. Is that such
a big deal?” I said. “I saw that,” she said, “and
that man was definitely not a farmer.” “Yeah, I
know,” I said, feeling better.
 
******
History
Barbara Ras

Of course wars, of course lice, of course limbs on opposing sides
to remind a body about ambivalence, of course orphans and empty beds and eyes
exiled for blinking in the harsh light. Of course Khrushchev gave Crimea
to the Ukraine in a blind drunk, and yes, land mines and burning skin
and of course organs, some members dismembered
to shake at strangers and their evil, and there is no way
to imagine that a man shaking a dried penis would ever utter the word darling.
Of course personal, add starch for pain, add bluing, of course hang
the laundry in the basement, there are thieves in the backyard, of course
departing trains, carload after carload of sorrow,
the man on top of a boxcar waving,
his rifle silhouetted against the white sky, its color draining
the way warmth left the Bosnian after he’d burned the last page of the last book,
knowing he had reached the end of something though it was not end enough.
Of course kisses, the stages of kissing like running borders,
endless conversations, stations of the cross, till even the promise of kissing bores you,
of course teeth gnashing, ethnic cleansing. The cynical will shrug off the past,
the future, the whole left hip of Ecuador slashed for six days of oil,
of course an X on the coats of the sick so they would stand apart
for deportation, of course rogue tumors over the body politic,
the same bodies that took Egyptian mummies and powdered them
to use as food seasoning, bon vivant cannibalism,
and yes civilized men tossed living penguins into furnaces to fuel their ships.
Of course partitions so that after the new territories were defined,
families had to line up on a cliff with bullhorns
to talk to their people on the other side,
of course courage, at times a weapon against yearning, surrender another,
a mother of course goes on setting the table, even if it’s with broken plates,
and a friend will say gently of course I want to ride with you to the funeral,
of course of course of course of course,
now then, negotiations, whatever,
palisades, the end of whimsy,
but then one evening though it is wartime,
a man climbs the hill to an amphitheater to play his cello at twilight
and history stops talking for a moment and sighs
while the melancholy of Albinoni
passes from heart to heart and each lifts a little,
the way passing a baby around a room can be sacramental,
and the memories of simple pleasures become more beautiful, the memory
of your joy on a highway to see in the next lane in a neighboring car
a clown take off his nose at the end of the day, the memory
of how your mother laid roses, sweetheart roses, on the cold grate of the fireplace,
and the sudden rain one afternoon in fall after you’d hiked far into the dells
and you huddled deep in your overcoat in the wet,
waiting out the storm with a sheep
that had come up to lean against your side
like a rock.
 
******
What It Was Like
Barbara Ras

If they ask what it was like, say it was like the sea
rolling barrels of itself at you in the shadowless light of the shore,
say it was like a spider, black as night, large as a campesino’s hand,
a deepness that could balance a small world of dirt as easily as a gift
of gleaming red tomatoes held out to you eight at a time.
If they ask you how it felt, say solitary,
at first the ease of sleeping alone, warm without even a sheet,
then the nonchalance of a dirt road leading down the hill, its dust
raised and re-raised in plumes as each guest departed,
and later, say it was like the blind cat that came out of nowhere
to lie on your tile floor, lifting its face to stare with white marble eyes.
If they ask what you heard, tell them the single note of the watchman,
who coughed his one syllable when you went to bed,
and at the end of every dream when you woke with a simple plea—stay, go—again, the cough of the watchman.
If they ask about thirst, tell them no one could carry water as far
as it had to go, so that when it was time to rest,
people went to the spigot at the edge of the train tracks
and cupped their hands under the water, lowering their faces to drink.
Tell them a man could stand at noon in the park wearing nothing but underwear
and beg for hours with his cup empty.
Tell them you could sit quietly while phrases you didn't know you knew 
rose up in the language there and on an undisturbed lake in your mind 
you could back float—that weightless prayer that prays Let me die with my toes pointing up at the sun.
When they ask what people will eventually get around to asking, 
How was the food? Tell them batata, mamón, guanábana, maní,
indigenous crops exchanging places with hunger,
giving up to the dark store window whose inventory is one hand
of bananas sold one banana at a time, giving up to little pyramids of limes
by the side of the road and the kids who tend them, dreaming
of a few coins tossed down in the dirt.
 
******
All
Barbara Ras

The prisoner can’t go any longer, but he does.
The beggar can’t go on begging, but watch—
Tomorrow he’ll be in the alley, holding out a bowl
To everyone, to even a young, possibly poorer, child.
The mother can’t go on believing,
But she will kneel for hours in the cathedral,
Holding silence in her arms.
The rain goes on, daily, sometimes, and we cry,
As often as not alone.
The fishmonger, the bell ringer, the cook, each
Can be corrupted in a less than dire way.
Nothing can replace the sea breezes you were born to.
Nothing can stay the shy ache in the palm
you hold out to the fortune-teller.
The concrete lions on her steps go on
Making bloodless journeys, they go on
Hunting in air longer than any of you will live to watch,
Hunting still after your futures become all irises
and blamelessness.
 
******
Sleeping with Butler’s Lives of the Saints
Eugene Gloria




After Octavio Paz



What’s most human must drive
an arrow to the heart.
 
Ghosts, too, must abide by this directive
& remain transparent,
 
going about their business in old houses.
Before I was an I, I longed to be ethereal.
 
Sprouting wings at will & gliding through
cul-de-sacs and malls around the valley.
 
My hands, too, would gradually disappear
followed by my arms, then neck & head
 
until my whole body was slight as allergen.
Before I was an I, I spoke an old language
 
that would return on drowsy afternoons.
Therefore I struggled to say
 
the simplest sentences. So much so
that the maligned semicolon
 
became an ardent ally, an island
of pause and the deep breath.
 
The comma, too, bless its tiny soul,
was the crumb which the god
 
of small favors multiplied
tenfold for my morning pie.
 
Before I was an I, knowledge
clung to me like burrs & hunger
 
guided my ship like the barefoot light                on the sleeping land & sea.
 
******
Hoodlum Birds
Eugene Gloria

The fearless blackbirds see me again
at the footpath beside the tall grasses
sprouting like unruly morning hair.
They caw and caw like vulgar boys
on street corners making love to girls
with their “hey mama
this” and their “hey mama that.”
But this gang of birds is much too slick.
They are my homeys of the air
with their mousse-backed hair and Crayola
black coats like small fry hoods who smoke
and joke about each other’s mothers,
virginal sisters, and the sweet arc of revenge.
These birds spurn my uneaten celery sticks,
feckless gestures, ineffective hosannas.
They tag one another, shrill and terrible,
caroling each to each my weekly wages.
But they let me pass, then flit away.
They won’t mess with me this time—
they know where I live.
 
******
Wilde's Tomb
Michael Gessner




But these, thy lovers are not dead.…They will rise up and hear your voice. . .. and run to kiss your mouth.
         –The Sphinx



In the garden of Père Lachaise,
city of the dead, we passed angels
covering their faces in shame,
& nineteenth-century trees, with tops bowed
as if their only purpose was to grieve,
& crossed the Transversales to Wilde’s grave.
 
When lovers leave, they leave their kisses
glistening on the gray slab,
on impressions of lips themselves,
a tissue of strangers’ cells
the conservators cannot leave alone,
& scrub the graffiti, as the plaque decrees
by law, no one can deface this tomb,
& still the images of lips remain,
dark gray stains of animal fat
imprisoned in limestone.
 
Lips are pressed as high as lovers
climb, against the Sphinx’s ridiculous
headdress, on the carved trumpet
of fame, & on the cheeks of its voracious face
of mindless passion flying with eyes pinched tight,
that some farsighted lover tried to open
with lines from a red pen, like a blepharoplasty,
while others kissed its sybaritic mouth
to make a poem a prophecy.
 
So here is love alive
surviving the wreckage it survives,
a lipstick envelope of hearts on their flight
to some other place, less aware,
more receiving, a final Champ de Grâce.
 
******
The Poem of Death
Michael Gessner

This is the poem of death.
There is only one
and no other.
 
Every one is an occasion,
one way or another,
and the last poem is this poem of death.
 
It is an occasion like no other.
I will no longer lope after elegance,
beauty’s body, or love’s wonder.
 
I will be sorry for everything
I was, and for everything I was not.
I speak to you as if you were my brother.
 
I will forgive everyone.
Death will make this possible.
There will be no other.
 
Death was in the mind
before thought or love,
in ourselves, and in our lovers.
 
The poem of death is speechless.
A companion will appear again
like another self, like your brother.
 
Enough now, enough has been said.
The spinning leaf will spin
like no other.
 
******
The Innocents at Sandy Hook
Michael Gessner

Nothing can reach you now, not lead or steel,
or what life itself eventually reveals.
 
No more studies of kindness or courtesy,
nor grace or charity, all is needless now.
 
All is needless now, sky, world, family
grieving for their bundles of purity,
 
now beyond disgrace, failure, winter streets,
or whatever attacks, and then retreats.
 
Classrooms emptied of children’s things,
paper and paste, and love’s imaginings,
 
bundles of peace, Christmas-blessed
with the unborn and the dead at rest,
 
nothing can reach you now, not lead or steel
or what life itself eventually reveals.
 
******
Fiddlers at the Desert Valley County Care Center
Michael Gessner

Among physicians rich in their death watch
In hallways crowded with locked wheelchairs,
Cradles of a century’s platitudes,
The stale air smelling of disinfectant
And weeping wounds enough to stupefy nurses,
Among the staring insomniacs of the day room,
The stroke victims on their rented gurneys,
Complaining orderlies and rattling carts
 
Among these in this place my father lay
At the end of everything
 
In the curved landscapes of white sheets
Abandoned finally by parents, his son,
 
The loyal company, old friends, his death
A sign of other deaths too soon to come
 
Unable to recall one life, his thoughts,
Features, he lay unknown to himself,
 
The tall hunter of pheasants out with his boy
In vellum corn and brassy orchards
 
In an autumn that never was, the proud
White-collared Ford employee lay on a bed
 
Too short for legs tattooed with red burn-rings
From daily syringes of Cytosar
 
Considered useless, still a requirement
For state funding for a body described
 
Leukemic waiting for Saturday's fiddlers
Who came to raise the spirits of the dead
 
With a music he never cared for turned
Suddenly attractive, he found genius,
 
Theirs or his like some lyrical phosphor
That shapes itself in the dry night air
 
To make a thing then make it disappear
He lay listening to the county fiddlers
 
At the end of every purpose, act and form
I leave you here, my father, in perfect accord.
 
******
Face
Indran Amirthanayagam

Imagine half your face
rubbed out yet
you are suited up
and walking
to the office.
 
How will your mates
greet you?
with heavy hearts,
flowers,
rosary beads?
How shall we greet
the orphan boy,
the husband whose hand
slipped, children
and wife swept away?
 
How to greet
our new years
and our birthdays?
Shall we always
light a candle?
 
Do we remember
that time erases
the shore, grass
grows, pain’s
modified?
 
At Hikkaduwa
in 1980 I wrote a ditty,
a sailor’s song
about rain
in sunny Ceylon.
 
I don’t know
what Calypsonians
would compose
about this monstrous
wave, this blind hatchet man;
 
don’t know
the Baila singers’ reply;
we are a “happy and
go” people
yet the fisherman’s wife
 
knows
that her grandfather
was eaten by the ocean—
fisher communities
have suffered in time
 
and what’s happened
now is just another feast
for that bloody,
sleeping mother
lapping at our island;
 
but what if the ocean
were innocent,
the tectonic plates
innocent, what if God
were innocent?
 
               *
 
I do not know
how to walk upon the beach,
how to lift corpse
after corpse
until I am exhausted,
 
how to stop the tears
when half my face
has been rubbed out
beyond
the railroad tracks
 
and this anaesthetic,
this calypso come
to the last verse.
What shall we write
in the sand?
 
Where are gravestones
incinerated? Whose
ashes are these urned
and floating through a house
throttled by water?
 
Shall we build
a memorial
some calculated distance
from the sea, in a park,
in the shape of a giant wave
 
where we can write
the names of the dead?
Has the wave lost
its beauty? Is it now
considered obscene?
 
               *
 
Yet tomorrow
we must go to the ocean
and refresh ourselves
in the sea breeze
down in Hikkaduwa
 
where it is raining
in sunny Ceylon.
Tomorrow, we must
renew our vows
at sunrise, at sunset.
 
Let us say the next time
the ocean recedes
and parrots gawk
and flee, and restless
dogs insist their humans
 
wake up, we will not peer
at the revelation
of the ocean bed,
nor seek photographs.
We will run to higher ground,
 
and gathered there
with our children,
our cats, dogs,
pigs, with what we’ve
carried in our hands
 
—albums, letters—
we will make a circle,
kneel, sit,
stand in no particular
direction, pray
 
and be silent,
open our lungs
and shout thanks
to our gods
thanks to our dogs.
 
******
Order
Indran Amirthanayagam

Jesus did not ride that monstrous wave,
not Yahweh, Jah, Allah, none of the major
 
Gods or the minor ones, not even the godless
strode that bugger which sliced our lives
 
in two: the past where we danced ballroom
while the children played carom, and mangos
 
stained our lapels, and today, hobbling,
scavenging in ash heaps, how easy
 
the arithmetic, day and night, two by two.
Bring on the mind workers.
 
Let a thousand doctors bloom.
I lived right here on the x, my name
 
is blue: sea green blue blue green
I do not speak in tongues. I am not
 
disordered, a babbler. I did not lose
anybody close to me, just 30,000
 
fellow island bees, not to worry, machan,
old fellow, I will subscribe tomorrow,
 
the order of every day, skip and jump rope,
whistle, talk to aid workers, even swim.
 
******
The City, with Elephants
Indran Amirthanayagam

The elephants of reckoning
are bunches of scruff
men and women picking up
thrown out antennae
from the rubbish
bins of the city
 
to fix on their tubular
bells and horn about
by oil can fires
in the freezing midnight
of the old new year
 
We ride by their music
every hour in cabs on trains
hearing the pit pat
of our grown-wise pulse
shut in shut out
 
from the animals
of the dry season
the losers and boozers,
we must not admit our eyes
into the courtyard
 
the whimsy of chance
and our other excuses—
dollars in pocket—
to write beautiful songs
is all I ask, God
 
to do right with friends
and love a woman
and live to eighty
have people listen
to the story of my trip to America
 
The elephants of reckoning
are beaten and hungry
and walk their solitary horrors
out every sunrise slurping
coffee bought with change
 
while in some houses
freedom-bound lovers
embrace late and read Tagore
about the people working
underneath the falling of empires.
 
******
Words for the Sri Lanka Tourist Office
Indran Amirthanayagam

The King Cobra slides
through our jungles,
and tucked in bushes
by the riverbanks
the grand Kabaragoya
holds court among lizards—
 
but if you want to swim
at Mount Lavinia, or fly kites
on Galle Face Green, or ride
horse carts in the Jaffna peninsula
of your ancestors, or bear a child
in Colombo General Hospital,
 
or sleep in Cinnamon Gardens
under a mango tree,
or beg in the Borella Market,
or ride for historical reasons
on patrol boats in the Bay,
or stilt-fish off Matara down South,
 
just remember here everywhere
 
there is only man burning
and woman burning
 
here everywhere
 
in shallow graves
in deep graves
floating out of salt water
washing down the sands
 
the dead have tongues
the dead have ears
tongues are speaking to ears
 
What are they saying?
What are they saying?
 
Tell us, brown bear
bolting out of your cave.
 
Tell us, leopard
leaning on your branch.
 
Tell us, flamingos.
Bend your necks
and pour wine pour wine
 
Hoopoes, kingfishers,
cranes, have you got your messages
on the bill, are you ready
to sing? Are you going to sing?
 
Monsoon.
 
Are you going to sing?
 
Monsoon.
 
Are you going to sing?
 
Monsoon. Monsoon.
 
******
Kiss
Indran Amirthanayagam

Kissing your lips
I try to forget roses
or the fruit of palmyra trees
sweet and strong
 
Tongue lolling upon tongue
heart beating
against heart beating,
these are my words
signifying our human bodies
which poetry does not capture,
the absolute desire I have
to kiss your lips
on this hot and sunny afternoon.
 
I do not know how much longer
I can walk about the garden
kissing roses,
 
or perambulate the toddy tavern of my dreams
where black faces and white toddy mix
in black and white memories
of Jaffna, Sri Lanka,
my Tamil countrymen
far away on an island across the sea.
 
Far away and far away
the palmyra fruit and your lips.
To drink toddy now.
To kiss your rosy lips now.
To uproot the roses in my garden
and offer them upon my tongue now.
 
To fly to Sri Lanka
and grab the last fruit on the tree
before history throws the Tamils into the sea
as is said it will do;
 
before all this and everything else,
before the apocalypse,
I do so sincerely wish,
though my words may not fit,
to rest my head in your hair
and kiss your lips.
 
******
hamsters are heads with little characteristics on the head, part one
Tao Lin

in florida a giant hamster lays in bed worrying about its future
the hamster has bad eyesight
and many other problems
later that night the hamster drives its car around
listening to sad music; the master lightly drums its paws on the steering wheel
the hamster is alone
but not for long: at home three waffle friends wait
cooling inside a countertop oven in the kitchen
 
******
hamsters are heads with little characteristics on the head, part three
Tao Lin

in the evening the hamster sits at the computer
watermelon juice and coffee sit by the computer
the hamster drinks all of the coffee
after a few minutes the hamster drinks all of the watermelon juice
the hamster lays its paw atop a neatly folded to-do list; this is a resourceful hamster
with a strong will, a sincere and loving hamster friend, and a confident nature
we do not need to spend any more time or empathy on this hamster
 
******
thirteen of twenty-four
Tao Lin

notice how my forehead approaches you at a high speed
notice the contortions on my face; hear and feel the impact
of my forehead against your eyebrow
never get angry if someone doesn’t do things for you
react to disappointment by being quiet and nice
and alone, not by being confrontational or frustrated
in 1952 a DSM copy-editor removed ‘headbutting’
from the entry for ‘psychopathic behavior’
thereafter the headbutt has thrived
across all social, political, and elementary school gym classes
today the headbutt is a sign of friendship, stability, and inner calm
the exponential effect of your repeated lies makes me afraid what will happen
to us; ‘the perfect headbutt’ destroys both participants and impresses
even the severely disillusioned, and the phrase ‘giant poem’ reverberates
through my head with the austerity of ancient ruins, the off-centered beauty
of repressed veganism, and the lord of the rings trilogy
I forgot what this poem was about
 
******
Turtle Came to See Me
Margarita Engle

The first story I ever write
is a bright crayon picture
of a dancing tree, the branches
tossed by island wind.
I draw myself standing beside the tree,
with a colorful parrot soaring above me,
and a magical turtle clasped in my hand,
and two yellow wings fluttering
on the proud shoulders of my ruffled
Cuban rumba dancer's
fancy dress.
In my California kindergarten class,
the teacher scolds me: REAL TREES
DON'T LOOK LIKE THAT.
It's the moment
when I first
begin to learn
that teachers
can be wrong.
They have never seen
the dancing plants
of Cuba.
 
******
Kinship
Margarita Engle

Two sets
of family stories,
one long and detailed,
about many centuries
of island ancestors, all living
on the same tropical farm...
The other side of the family tells stories
that are brief and vague, about violence
in the Ukraine, which Dad's parents
had to flee forever, leaving all their
loved ones
behind.
They don't even know if anyone
survived.
When Mami tells her flowery tales of Cuba,
she fills the twining words with relatives.
But when I ask my
Ukrainian-Jewish-American grandma
about her childhood in a village
near snowy Kiev,
all she reveals is a single
memory
of ice-skating
on a frozen pond.
Apparently, the length
of a grown-up's
growing-up story
is determined
by the difference
between immigration
and escape.
 
******
Ritmo/Rhythm
Margarita Engle

Mad has decided to catch a vulture,
the biggest bird she can find.
 
She is so determined, and so inventive,
that by stringing together a rickety trap
of ropes and sticks, she creates
a puzzling structure that just might
be clever enough to trick a buzzard,
once the trap’s baited with leftover pork
from supper.
 
Mad and I used to do everything together,
but now I need a project all my own,
so I roam the green fields,
finding bones.
 
The skull of a wild boar.
The jawbone of a mule.
 
Older cousins show me
how to shake the mule’s quijada,
to make the blunt teeth
rattle.
 
Guitars.
Drums.
Gourds.
Sticks.
 
A cow bell.
A washboard.
Pretty soon, we have
a whole orchestra.
 
On Cuban farms, even death
can turn into
music.
 
******
More Dangerous Air
Margarita Engle

Newsmen call it the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Teachers say it's the end of the world.
At school, they instruct us to look up
and watch the Cuban-cursed sky.
Search for a streak of light.
Listen for a piercing shriek,
the whistle that will warn us
as poisonous A-bombs
zoom close.
Hide under a desk.
Pretend that furniture is enough
to protect us against perilous flames.
Radiation. Contamination. Toxic breath.
Each air-raid drill is sheer terror,
but some of the city kids giggle.
They don't believe that death
is real.
They've never touched a bullet,
or seen a vulture, or made music
by shaking
the jawbone
of a mule.
When I hide under my frail school desk,
my heart grows as rough and brittle
as the slab of wood
that fails to protect me
from reality's
gloom.
******
Napalm
Quan Barry

I have come to realize the body is its own pyre, that degree
rises from within, the fatty acids a kind of kindling.
Like a scientist in a lab, this much I have established, blood jelled
like gasoline, the years spread before me like a map
pinned with targets, where I’m raging even now.
It works both ways. Clear the forests to see your enemies
and your enemies see you clearly. Like all effective incendiaries,
I won’t only bloom where I’m planted.
 
******
vigil
Quan Barry




And both the girls cried bitterly (though they hardly knew why) and clung to the Lion and kissed his mane and his nose and his paws and his great, sad eyes. Then he turned from them and walked out onto the top of the hill. And Lucy and Susan, crouching in the bushes, looked after him and this is what they saw.
—C. S. Lewis, The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe



Tonight we will function like women.
The snow has gone away, the ice with its amniotic glare.
I clasp my sister’s tiny hand.
We will not turn away
Though spring, spring with its black appetite,
Comes seeping out of the earth.
 
The lion was sad. He suffered us
To touch him. When I placed the bread of my hands
In his mammalian heat, I was reminded
That the world outside this world
Is all vinegar and gall, that to be a young girl at the foot of a god
Requires patience. Timing.
 
The White Witch has mustered her partisans.
Because I am fascinated by her bracelets strung with baby teeth,
I will remember her as the woman
Who grins with her wrists. From my thicket of heather
I note that in her own congenital way
She is pure, that tonight she ushers something new into the world.
 
I cannot stop it. I cannot stop it just as in that other place
I could not keep the planes with their spiked fires from coming.
Though in this closed realm the smell of camphor is overwhelming
I have nothing but my hands to use
In ministering to the dead. Here too
My hands must suffice.
 
Hush now while I testify. They are shaving him.
The corona of his mane falls away
Like pieces of money. In the moon’s milk light
Her bangled wrists grin as she raises the blade.
Something is diffused. In whatever world he comes again
There will be women like us who choose to.
 
******
loose strife [Somebody says draw a map]
Quan Barry

Somebody says draw a map. Populate it with the incidents
of your childhood. Mark the spot where the lake receded
after a winter of light snow. The stairs on which someone
slapped you. The place where the family dog hung itself
by jumping over the back fence while still on the dog run,
hours later its body like a limp flag on a windless day.
Draw a map, someone says. Let yourself remember.
In the refugee camp a hundred thousand strong
draw the stony outcrop from which you could no longer see
the plume of smoke that was your village. Draw a square
for the bathroom stall where Grandpa hid each day
in order to eat his one egg free from the starving eyes
of his classmates, an X for the courthouse where you and he
were naturalized, a broken line for the journey. Draw a map,
Jon says. Let it be your way into the poem. Here is where
that plane filled with babies crashed that I was not on.
Here is where I was ashamed. On the second floor
at Pranash University the people wait their turn. Have you
drawn your map, Jon asks. He has rolled up his sleeves.
Forty-five minutes to noon the Prince stands up and says
that the monks must be excused. We watch them file out,
saffron robes as if their bodies have burst into blossom.
Draw a map. Fly halfway around the globe. Here is the room
next to the library where you realize how poor your tradition is,
the local people with poetic forms still in use that date back
to the time of Christ. Tell us about your map. Explain
how these wavy lines represent the river, this rectangle
the school-turned-prison where only seven
escaped with their lives. This is my map. This star the place
where I sat in a roomful of people among whom not one
was not touched by genocide. Every last map resplendent with death
though nobody knows where their loved ones lie buried.
How many times can I appropriate a story that is not mine to tell?
The woman stands up and says she is not a poet, that she
doesn’t have the words. She points to a triangle on a piece of paper.
Here is the spot where she found human bones in the well
of her childhood home, and how her mother told herdon’t be afraid because it was not the work of wild animals.
******
loose strife [Listen closely as I sing this]
Quan Barry

Listen closely as I sing this. The man standing at the gate
tottering on his remaining limb is a kind of metronome, his one
leg planted firmly on the earth. Yes, I have made him beautiful
 
because I aim to lay all my cards on the table. In the book review
the critic writes, “Barry seeks not to judge but to understand.”
Did she want us to let her be, or does she want
 
to be there walking the grounds of the old prison on the hill
of the poison tree where comparatively a paltry twenty thousand
died? In the first room with the blown up
 
black-and-white of a human body gone abstract someone has
to turn and face the wall not because of the human pain
represented in the photo but because of her calmness,
 
the tranquility with which she tells us that her father
and her sister and her brother were killed. In graduate school
a whole workshop devoted to an image of a woman with bleach
 
thrown in the face and the question of whether or not
the author could write, “The full moon sat in the window
like a calcified eye, the woman’s face aglow with a knowingness.”
 
I felt it come over me and I couldn’t stop. I tried to pull myself
together and I couldn’t. They were children. An army of child
soldiers. In the room papered with photos of the Khmer Rouge
 
picture after picture of teenagers, children whose parents
were killed so that they would be left alone in the world
to do the grisly work that precedes paradise.
 
And the photos of the victims, the woman holding her newborn
in her arms as her head is positioned in a vise, in this case
the vise an instrument not of torture
 
but of documentation, the head held still as the camera captures
the image, the thing linking all their faces, the abject fear
and total hopelessness as exists
 
in only a handful of places in the history of the visible world.
For three $US per person she will guide you through what was
Tuol Sleng prison, hill of the strychnine tree.
 
Without any affectation she will tell you the story of how
her father and her sister and her brother went among
the two million dead. There are seventy-four forms
 
of poetry in this country and each one is still meant to be sung.
 
******
loose strife [Say, when we woke those icy spring mornings]
Quan Barry

Say, when we woke those icy spring mornings they were still there.
The upper portion of their faces long ruined but you could still see
                                        the meaning in their hands,
 
palms once covered in gold. We knew better than to call them
by their names, Light that Shines Throughout the Universe
                         and His consort, but there were stories
 
of  travelers lost  in the foothills of  the Hindu  Kush and a distant
brilliance that led them home. The way a candle physically enters
                                        your body after it has been
 
snuffed out. The pearly smoke suffused in the air. In one school
hundreds  of  miles  away  all  the   girls  my age  were  poisoned,
                              and last week outside the capital
 
a woman like my  sister was shot dead  in front of a crowd by two men
who forced their bodies into her body and then judged her an infidel
                                        so they could kill her
 
and be done with it.  After the  visitors were blasted I had a dream.
I saw a human man standing by a lake and no one was looking at him
                                          directly. His image
 
on the surface of the water cleaner than anything in this world.
In   my   dream  the  man   said,  “Thousands   of  lifetimes  ago
                                        when my body was cut
 
into pieces by an evil king, I was not caught up in the idea of the self.”
Then  in  my   dream  someone   picked  up  a rock  and  I  woke  up.
                              It took almost a month,
 
the  great  heads  drilled with holes,  then anti-aircraft  tanks rolled in.
Each hundred-foot niche now empty but each cavity left shaped like us,
                              like a person. Before it happened
 
we talked about it. Grandfather said don’t they have a share in heaven?
Second Aunt said it was more realistic this way. God not in heaven
                                        but in exile.
 
******
Craft [The first great poet]
Quan Barry

The   first    great    poet  of
the  crisis  the   one  whose
generation   was  left  as  if
firebombed     though      if
you    look     back   at    the
seminal    work    you   will
see  that only a  handful of
 
of   the   poems    explicitly 
touch   on   that  dark time 
the    blood    filling     with 
virulence    and   the  night 
always          black         and
spangled   with  stars  says 
when           faced         with
 
difficult      material      the 
poet       should          begin
obliquely      creeping     in 
from   the   edge  a  square 
of         light             moving
imperceptibly   across  the
floor as    the earth    turns
 
and   so   I   will   tell    you 
that  ever  since  I saw  the 
footage           of              the
journalists   hiding  in  the
attic      the    rope    ladder
pulled     up     after    them
only     the       one       with
 
foreign   papers    left     to
stand   her   ground  down
below   the   journalist    at
first     calmly    sitting   on
the      couch      but     then
huddling  in  a   cabinet  as
the     soldiers    enter    the
 
apartment     next       door,
the   cries   of   the  mother
floating       through       the
wall       ib’ni       ib’ni     the
language     ancient       like
something       whetted   on
stone     the   way   I   image
 
language      would        have
sounded     in     the  broken
mouth    of     King      DavidAbsalom        Absalom    the
man-child       hanging     by
the    shining    black   noose
of     his     own    hair  in the
 
fragrant         woods           of
Ephraim       ib’ni           ib’ni
next    door    the   sound  of 
a    body      being     dragged 
from     the    apartment    as 
his            mother           wails
into      the        dark        how
 
many     mothers   and   how 
many     sons    dragged   out 
into    a       night     spangled 
with             stars          where
everything    is  a   metaphor
for      virulence      my     son my   son   and   ever  since  I
 
saw    a   clip  of the   footage
the       foreign        journalist
managed   to    smuggle   out
of   the  country   images   of
the        journalist       herself
hiding   in   a   space   meant
for   buckets   and   rags    as
 
next     door    the     soldiers 
drag    away   a   young   boy 
please     hear     it   again   a 
child    of    no    more   than 
twelve         his        mother’s
lamentations             forever
seared   in    the    blood   of
 
this    thing   I   call  my  life
but     really     what     is    it
what   is   this  light  I   hold
so   dear  it  wants   to move
imperceptibly    across   the
floor    as   the   earth   turns
so     as   not     to      become
 
too       aware      of      itself?